ACT I.
SCENE-A Forest.
Enter King DUSHYANTA, _armed with a bow and arrow, in a chariot,
chasing an antelope, attended by his_ CHARIOTEER.
CHARIOTEER.
[_Looking at the deer, and then at the_ KING.
Great Prince,
When on the antelope I bend my gaze, And on your Majesty, whose
mighty bow Has its string firmly braced; before my eyes The god that
wields the trident seems revealed. Chasing the deer that flies from him
in vain.
KING.
Charioteer, this fleet antelope has drawn us far from my attendants. See!
there he runs:
Aye and anon his graceful neck he bends To cast a glance at the pursuing
car; And dreading now the swift-descending shaft, Contracts into itself his
slender frame; About his path, in scattered fragments strewn, The
half-chewed grass falls from his panting mouth; See! in his airy bounds he
seems to fly, And leaves no trace upon th' elastic turf.
[With astonishment.]
How now! swift as is our pursuit, I scarce can see him.
CHARIOTEER.
Sire, the ground here is full of hollows; I have therefore drawn in the reins
and checked the speed of the chariot. Hence the deer has somewhat gained
upon us. Now that we are passing over level ground, we shall have no
difficulty in overtaking him.
KING.
Loosen the reins, then.
CHARIOTEER.
The King is obeyed.
[Drives the chariot at full speed.]
Great Prince, see I see!
Responsive to the slackened rein, the steeds, Chafing with eager rivalry,
career With emulative fleetness o'er the plain; Their necks outstretched,
their waving plumes, that late Fluttered above their brows, are
motionless; Their sprightly ears, but now erect, bent low; Themselves
unsullied by the circling dust, That vainly follows on their rapid course.
KING. [Joyously.
In good sooth, the horses seem as if they would outstrip the steeds of Indra
and the Sun.
That which but now showed to my view minute Quickly assumes
dimension; that which seemed A moment since disjoined in diverse parts,
Looks suddenly like one compacted whole; That which is really crooked in
its shape In the far distance left, grows regular; Wondrous the chariot's
speed, that in a breath, Makes the near distant and the distant near.
Now, Charioteer, see me kill the deer.
[Takes aim.
A VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.
Hold, O King! this deer belongs to our hermitage. Kill it not! kill it not!
CHARIOTEER. [Listening and looking.
Great King, some hermits have stationed themselves so as to screen the
antelope at the very moment of its coming within range of your arrow.
KING. [Hastily.
Then stop the horses.
CHARIOTEER.
I obey.
[Stops the chariot.
Enter a HERMIT, and two others with him.]
HERMIT. [Raising his hand.
This deer, O King, belongs to our hermitage. Kill it not! kill it not!
Now heaven forbid this barbed shaft descend Upon the fragile body of a
fawn, Like fire upon a heap of tender flowers! Can thy steel bolts no
meeter quarry find Than the warm life-blood of a harmless deer? Restore,
great Prince, thy weapon to its quiver. More it becomes thy arms to shield
the weak, Than to bring anguish on the innocent.
KING.
'Tis done.
[Replaces the arrow in its quiver.
HERMIT.
Worthy is this action of a Prince, the light of Puru's race.
Well does this act befit a Prince like thee, Right worthy is it of thine
ancestry. Thy guerdon be a son of peerless worth, Whose wide dominion
shall embrace the earth.
BOTH THE OTHER HERMITS. [Raising their hands.
May heaven indeed grant thee a son, a sovereign of the earth from sea to
sea!
KING.
[Bowing.
I accept with gratitude a Bráhman's benediction.
HERMIT.
We came hither, mighty Prince, to collect sacrificial wood. Here on the
banks of the Máliní you may perceive the hermitage of the great sage
Kanwa. If other duties require not your presence, deign to enter and
accept our hospitality.
When you behold our penitential rites Performed without impediment by
saints Rich only in devotion, then with pride Will you reflect:--Such are the
holy men Who call me Guardian; such the men for whom To wield the
bow I bare my nervous arm, Scarred by the motion of the glancing string.
KING.
Is the Chief of your Society now at home?
HERMIT.
No; he has gone to Soma-tírtha to propitiate Destiny, which threatens
his daughter [S']akoontalá with some calamity; but he has commissioned
her in his absence to entertain all guests with hospitality.
KING.
Good! I will pay her a visit. She will make me acquainted with the mighty
sage's acts of penance and devotion.
HERMIT.
And we will depart on our errand.
[Exit with his companions.
KING.
Charioteer, urge on the horses. We will at least purify our souls by a sight
of this hallowed retreat.
CHARIOTEER.
Your Majesty is obeyed.
[Drives the chariot with great velocity.
KING. [Looking all about him.
Charioteer, even without being told, I should have known that these were
the precincts of a grove consecrated to penitential rites.
CHARIOTEER.
How so?
KING.
Do not you observe?
Beneath the trees, whose hollow trunks afford Secure retreat to many a
nestling brood Of parrots, scattered grains of rice lie strewn. Lo! here and
there are seen the polished slabs That serve to bruise the fruit of
Ingudí. The gentle roe-deer, taught to trust in man, Unstartled hear our
voices. On the paths Appear the traces of bark-woven vests Borne
dripping from the limpid fount of waters.
And mark!
Laved are the roots of trees by deep canals , Whose glassy waters
tremble in the breeze; The sprouting verdure of the leaves is dimmed By
dusky wreaths of upward curling smoke From burnt oblations; and on
new-mown lawns Around our car graze leisurely the fawns.
CHARIOTEER.
I observe it all.
KING. [Advancing a little further.
The inhabitants of this sacred retreat must not be disturbed. Stay the
chariot, that I may alight.
CHARIOTEER.
The reins are held in. Your Majesty may descend.
KING. [Alighting.
Charioteer, groves devoted to penance must be entered in humble attire.
Take these ornaments.
[Delivers his ornaments and bow to CHARIOTEER.]
Charioteer, see that the horses are watered, and attend to them until I return
from visiting the inhabitants of the hermitage.
CHARIOTEER.
I Will.
[Exit.
KING. [Walking and looking about.
Here is the entrance to the hermitage. I will now go in.
[Entering and feeling a throbbing sensation in his arm.
Serenest peace is in this calm retreat, By passion's breath unruffled; what
portends My throbbing arm? Why should it whisper here Of happy
love? Yet everywhere around us Stand the closed portals of events
unknown.
A VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.
This way, my dear companions; this way.
KING. [Listening.
Hark! I hear voices to the right of yonder grove of trees. I will walk in that
direction.
[Walking and looking about.]
Ah! here are the maidens of the hermitage coming this way to water the
shrubs, carrying water-pots proportioned to their strength.
[Gazing at them.]
How graceful they look!
In palaces such charms are rarely ours; The woodland plants outshine the
garden flowers.
I will conceal myself in this shade and watch them.
[Stands gazing at them.
_Enter [S']AKOONTALÁ, with her two female companions, employed in
the manner described_.
[S']AKOONTALÁ
This way, my dear companions; this way.
ANASÚYÁ.
Dear [S']akoontalá, one would think that father Kanwa had more affection
for the shrubs of the hermitage even than for you, seeing he assigns to you,
who are yourself as delicate as the fresh-blown jasmine, the task of filling
with water the trenches which encircle their roots.
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Dear Anasúyá, although I am charged by my good father with this duty, yet
I cannot regard it as a task. I really feel a sisterly love for these plants.
[Continues watering the shrubs.
KING.
Can this be the daughter of Kanwa? The saintly man, though descended
from the great Kasyapa, must be very deficient in judgment to habituate
such a maiden to the life of a recluse.
The sage who would this form of artless grace Inure to penance,
thoughtlessly attempts To cleave in twain the hard acacia's stem With
the soft edge of a blue lotus-leaf.
Well! concealed behind this tree, I will watch her without raising her
suspicions.
[Conceals himself.
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Good Anasúyá, Priyamvadá has drawn this bark-dress too tightly about my
chest. I pray thee, loosen it a little.
ANASÚYÁ.
I will. [Loosens it.
PRIYAMVADÁ. [Smiling.
Why do you lay the blame on me? Blame rather your own blooming
youthfulness which imparts fulness to your bosom.
KING.
A most just observation!
This youthful form, whose bosom's swelling charms By the bark's knotted
tissue are concealed, Like some fair bud close folded in its sheath, Gives
not to view the blooming of its beauty.
But what am I saying? In real truth this bark-dress, though ill-suited to her
figure, sets it off like an ornament.
The lotus with the [S']aivala entwined Is not a whit less brilliant;
dusky spots Heighten the lustre of the cold-rayed moon; This lovely
maiden in her dress of bark Seems all the lovelier. E'en the meanest garb
Gives to true beauty fresh attractiveness.
[S']AKOONTALÁ. [Looking before her.
Yon Ke[S']ara-tree beckons to me with its young shoots, which, as the
breeze waves them to and fro, appear like slender fingers. I will go and
attend to it.
[Walks towards it.
PRIYAMVADÁ.
Dear [S']akoontalá, prithee, rest in that attitude one moment.
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Why so?
PRIYAMVADÁ
The Ke[S']ara-tree, whilst your graceful form bends about its stem, appears
as if it were wedded to some lovely twining creeper.
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Ah! saucy girl, you are most appropriately named Priyamvadá ('Speaker of
flattering things').
KING.
What Priyamvadá says, though complimentary, is nevertheless true. Verily,
Her ruddy lip vies with the opening bud; Her graceful arms are as the
twining stalks; And her whole form is radiant with the glow Of youthful
beauty, as the tree with bloom.
ANASÚYÁ.
See, dear [S']akoontalá, here is the young jasmine, which you named 'the
Moonlight of the Grove,' the self-elected wife of the mango-tree. Have you
forgotten it?
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Rather will I forget myself.
[Approaching the plant and looking at it.]
How delightful is the season when the jasmine-creeper and the mango-tree
seem thus to unite in mutual embraces! The fresh blossoms of the jasmine
resemble the bloom of a young bride, and the newly-formed shoots of the
mango appear to make it her natural protector.
[Continues gazing at it.
PRIYAMVADÁ.
Do you know, my Anasúyá, why [S']akoontalá gazes so intently at the
jasmine?
ANASÚYÁ.
No, indeed, I cannot imagine. I pray thee tell me.
PRIYAMVADÁ.
She is wishing that as the jasmine is united to a suitable tree, so, in like
manner, she may obtain a husband worthy of her.
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Speak for yourself, girl; this is the thought in your own mind.
[Continues watering the flowers.
KING.
Would that my union with her were permissible! and yet I hardly dare
hope that the maiden is sprung from a caste different from that of the Head
of the hermitage. But away with doubt:
That she is free to wed a warrior-king My heart attests. For, in conflicting
doubts, The secret promptings of the good man's soul Are an unerring
index of the truth.
However, come what may, I will ascertain the fact.
[S']AKOONTALÁ. [In a flurry.
Ah! a bee, disturbed by the sprinkling of the water, has left the young
jasmine, and is trying to settle on my face.
[Attempts to drive it away.
KING. [Gazing at her ardently.
Beautiful! there is something charming even in her repulse.
Where'er the bee his eager onset plies, Now here, now there, she darts her
kindling eyes; What love hath yet to teach, fear teaches now, The furtive
glances and the frowning brow.
[In a tone of envy.
Ah, happy bee! how boldly dost thou try To steal the lustre from her
sparkling eye; And in thy circling movements hover near, To murmur
tender secrets in her ear; Or, as she coyly waves her hand, to sip
Voluptuous nectar from her lower lip! While rising doubts my heart's fond
hopes destroy, Thou dost the fulness of her charms enjoy.
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
This impertinent bee will not rest quiet. I must move elsewhere.
[_Moving a few steps off, and casting a glance around_.]
How now! he is following me here. Help! my dear friends, help! deliver
me from the attacks of this troublesome insect.
PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.
How can we deliver you? Call Dushyanta to your aid. The sacred groves
are under the King's special protection.
KING.
An excellent opportunity for me to show myself. Fear not--
[_Checks himself when the words are half-uttered; Aside_.]
But stay, if I introduce myself in this manner, they will know me to be the
King. Be it so, I will accost them, nevertheless.
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
[Moving a step or two further off.
What! it still persists in following me.
KING. [Advancing hastily.
When mighty Puru's offspring sways the earth, And o'er the wayward holds
his threatening rod, Who dares molest the gentle maids that keep Their
holy vigils here in Kanwa's grove?
[All look at the KING, and all are embarrassed.
ANASÚYÁ.
Kind Sir, no outrage has been committed; only our dear friend here was
teased by the attacks of a troublesome bee.
[Points to [S']AKOONTALÁ.
KING. [Turning to [S']AKOONTALÁ.
I trust all is well with your devotional rites?
[[S']AKOONTALÁ stands confused and silent.]
ANASÚYÁ.
All is well indeed, now that we are honoured by the reception of a
distinguished guest. Dear [S']akoontalá, go, bring from the hermitage an
offering of flowers, rice, and fruit. This water that we have brought with us
will serve to bathe our guest's feet.
KING.
The rites of hospitality are already performed; your truly kind words are
the best offering I can receive.
PRIYAMVADÁ.
At least be good enough, gentle Sir, to sit down awhile, and rest yourself
on this seat shaded by the leaves of the Sapta-parna tree.
KING.
You, too, must all be fatigued by your employment.
ANASÚYÁ.
Dear [S']akoontalá, there is no impropriety in our sitting by the side of our
guest; come, let us sit down here.
[All sit down together.
[S']AKOONTALÁ. [Aside.
How is it that the sight of this made me sensible of emotions inconsistent
with religious vows?
KING. [Gazing at them all By turns.
How charmingly your friendship is in keeping with the equality of your
ages and appearance!
PRIYAMVADÁ. [_Aside to ANASÚYÁ_.
Who can this person be, whose lively yet dignified manner, and polite
conversation, bespeak him a man of high rank?
ANASÚYÁ.
I, too, my dear, am very curious to know. I will ask him myself.
[_Aloud_]
Your kind words, noble Sir, fill me with confidence, and prompt me to
inquire of what regal family our noble guest is the ornament? what country
is now mourning his absence? and what induced a person so delicately
nurtured to expose himself to the fatigue of visiting this grove of penance?
[S']AKOONTALÁ. [Aside.
Be not troubled, O my heart, Anasúyá is giving utterance to thy thoughts.
KING. [Aside.
How now shall I reply? shall I make myself known, or shall I still disguise
my real rank? I have it; I will answer her thus. [Aloud.] I am the person
charged by his Majesty, the descendant of Puru, with the administration of
justice and religion; and am come to this sacred grove to satisfy myself that
the rites of the hermits are free from obstruction.
ANASÚYÁ.
The hermits, then, and all the members of our religious society, have now a
guardian.
[[S']AKOONTALÁ gazes bashfully at the KING.
PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.
[_Perceiving the state of her feelings, and of the_ KING'S. Aside to
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Dear [S']akoontalá, if father Kanwa were but at home to-day--
[S']AKOONTALÁ. [Angrily.
What if he were?
PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.
He would honour this our distinguished guest with an offering of the most
precious of his possessions.
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Go to! you have some silly idea in your minds, I will not listen to such
remarks.
KING.
May I be allowed, in my turn, to ask you maidens a few particulars
respecting your friend?
PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.
Your request, Sir, is an honour.
KING.
The sage Kanwa lives in the constant practice of austerities. How, then, can
this friend of yours be called his daughter?
ANASÚYÁ.
I will explain to you. Sir. You have heard of an illustrious sage of regal
caste, Vi[s']wámitra, whose family name is Kau[S']ika.
KING.
I have.
ANASÚYÁ.
Know that he is the real father of our friend. The venerable Kanwa is only
her reputed father. He it was who brought her up, when she was deserted
by her mother.
KING.
'Deserted by her mother!' My curiosity is excited; pray let me hear the
story from the beginning.
ANASÚYÁ.
You shall hear it, Sir. Some time since, this sage of regal caste, while
performing a most severe penance on the banks of the river Godávarí,
excited the jealousy and alarm of the gods; insomuch that they despatched
a lovely nymph named Menaká to interrupt his devotions.
KING.
The inferior gods, I am aware, are jealous of the power which the
practice of excessive devotion confers on mortals.
ANASÚYÁ.
Well, then, it happened that Vi[s']wámitra, gazing on the bewitching
beauty of that nymph at a season when, spring being in its glory--
[_Stops short, and appears confused_.
KING.
The rest may be easily divined. [S']akoontalá, then, is the offspring of the
nymph.
ANASÚYÁ.
Just so.
KING.
It is quite intelligible.
How would a mortal to such charms give birth? The lightning's radiance
flashes not from earth.
[[S']AKOONTALÁ remains modestly seated with downcast eyes. Aside.]
And so my desire has really scope for its indulgence. Yet I am still
distracted by doubts, remembering the pleasantry of her female
companions respecting her wish for a husband.
PRIYAMVADÁ.
[_Looking with a smile at [S']AKOONTALÁ, and then turning towards the
KING.]
You seem desirous, Sir, of asking something further.
[[S']AKOONTALÁ makes a chiding gesture with her finger.
KING.
You conjecture truly. I am so eager to hear the particulars of your friend's
history, that I have still another question to ask.
PRIYAMVADÁ.
Scruple not to do so. Persons who lead the life of hermits may be
questioned unreservedly.
KING.
I wish to ascertain one point respecting your friend.
Will she be bound by solitary vows Opposed to love, till her espousals
only? Or ever dwell with these her cherished fawns, Whose eyes, in lustre
vying with her own, Return her gaze of sisterly affection?
PRIYAMVADÁ.
Hitherto, Sir, she has been engaged in the practice of religious duties, and
has lived in subjection to her foster-father; but it is now his fixed intention
to give her away in marriage to a husband worthy of her.
KING. [Aside.
His intention may be easily carried into effect.
Be hopeful, O my heart, thy harrowing doubts Are past and gone; that
which thou didst believe To be as unapproachable as fire, Is found a
glittering gem that may be touched.
[S']AKOONTALÁ. [Pretending anger.
Anasúyá, I shall leave you.
ANASÚYÁ.
Why so?
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
That I may go and report this impertinent Priyamvadá to the venerable
matron, Gautamí.
ANASÚYÁ.
Surely, dear friend, it would not be right to leave a distinguished guest
before he has received the rites of hospitality, and quit his presence in this
wilful manner.
[[S']AKOONTALÁ, _without answering a word, moves away_.
KING.
[_Making a movement to arrest her departure, but checking himself.
Aside_.
Ah! a lover's feelings betray themselves by his gestures.
When I would fain have stayed the maid, a sense Of due decorum checked
my bold design; Though I have stirred not, yet my mien betrays My
eagerness to follow on her steps.
PRIYAMVADÁ.
[_Holding [S']AKOONTALÁ back_.
Dear [S']akoontalá, it does not become you to go away in this manner.
[S']AKOONTALÁ. [Frowning.
Why not, pray?
PRIYAMVADÁ.
You are under a promise to water two more shrubs for me. When you have
paid your debt, you shall go, and not before.
[Forces her to turn back.
KING.
Spare her this trouble, gentle maiden. The exertion of watering the shrubs
has already fatigued her.
The water-jar has overtasked the strength Of her slim arms; her shoulders
droop, her hands Are ruddy with the glow of quickened pulses; E'en now
her agitated breath imparts Unwonted tremor to her heaving breast; The
pearly drops that mar the recent bloom Of the [S']irísha pendent in her ear,
Gather in clustering circles on her cheek; Loosed is the fillet of her hair;
her hand Restrains the locks that struggle to be free. Suffer me, then, thus
to discharge the debt for you.
[Offers a ring to PRIYAMVADÁ. _Both the maidens, reading the name_
DUSHYANTA _on the seal, look at each other with surprise_.
KING.
Nay, think not that I am King Dushyanta. I am only the King's officer, and
this is the ring which I have received from him as my credentials.
PRIYAMVADÁ.
The greater the reason you ought not to part with the ring from your finger.
I am content to release her from her obligation at your simple request.
[With a smile.]
Now, [S']akoontalá, my love, you are at liberty to retire, thanks to the
intercession of this noble stranger, or rather of this mighty prince.
[S']AKOONTALÁ. [Aside.
My movements are no longer under my own control.
[Aloud.
Pray, what authority have you over me, either to send me away or keep me
back?
KING. [Gazing at [S']AKOONTALÁ. Aside.
Would I could ascertain whether she is affected towards me as I am
towards her! At any rate, my hopes are free to indulge themselves.
Because,
Although she mingles not her words with mine, Yet doth her listening ear
drink in my speech; Although her eye shrinks from my ardent gaze, No
form but mine attracts its timid glances.
A VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.
O hermits, be ready to protect the animals belonging to our hermitage.
King Dushyanta, amusing himself with hunting, is near at hand.
Lo! by the feet of prancing horses raised, Thick clouds of moving dust, like
glittering swarms Of locusts, in the glow of eventide, Fall on the branches
of our sacred trees Where hang the dripping vests of woven bark, Bleached
by the waters of the cleansing fountain.
And see!
Scared by the royal chariot in its course, With headlong haste an elephant
invades The hallowed precincts of our sacred grove; Himself the terror of
the startled deer, And an embodied hindrance to our rites. The hedge of
creepers clinging to his feet, Feeble obstruction to his mad career, Is
dragged behind him in a tangled chain; And with terrific shock one tusk he
drives Into the riven body of a tree, Sweeping before him all impediments.
KING. [Aside.
Out upon it! my retinue are looking for me, and are disturbing this holy
retreat. Well! there is no help for it; I must go and meet them.
PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.
Noble Sir, we are terrified by the accidental disturbance caused by the wild
elephant. Permit us to return to the cottage.
KING. [Hastily.
Go, gentle maidens. It shall be our care that no injury happen to the
hermitage.
[All rise up.
PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.
After such poor hospitality, we are ashamed to request the honour of a
second visit from you.
KING.
Say not so. The mere sight of you, sweet maidens, has been to me the best
entertainment.
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Anasúyá, a pointed blade of Ku[s']a-grass  has pricked my foot; and
my bark-mantle is caught in the branch of a Kuruvaka-bush. Be so
good as to wait for me until I have disentangled it.
[_Exit with her two companions, after making pretexts for delay, that she
may steal glances at the_ KING.
KING.
I have no longer any desire to return to the city. I will therefore rejoin my
attendants, and make them encamp somewhere in the vicinity of this sacred
grove. In good truth, [S']akoontalá has taken such possession of my
thoughts, that I cannot turn myself in any other direction.
My limbs drawn onward leave my heart behind, Like silken pennon borne
against the wind.
* * * * *
ACT II.
SCENE.--_A plain on the skirts of the forest.
Enter the Jester_  MÁ[T.]HAVYA, in a melancholy mood.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA. [Sighing.
Heigh-ho! what an unlucky fellow I am! worn to a shadow by my royal
friend's sporting propensities. 'Here's a deer!' 'There goes a boar!' 'Yonder's
a tiger!' This is the only burden of our talk, while in the heat of the
meridian sun we toil on from jungle to jungle, wandering about in the paths
of the woods, where the trees afford us no shelter. Are we thirsty? We have
nothing to drink but the dirty water of some mountain stream mixed with
dry leaves, which give it a most pungent flavour. Are we hungry? We have
nothing to eat but roast game, which we must swallow down at odd
times, as best we can. Even at night there is no peace to be had. Sleeping is
out of the question, with joints all strained by dancing attendance upon my
sporting friend; or if I do happen to doze, I am awakened at the very
earliest dawn by the horrible din of a lot of rascally beaters and huntsmen,
who must needs surround the wood before sunrise, and deafen me with
their clatter. Nor are these my only troubles. Here's a fresh grievance, like a
new boil rising upon an old one! Yesterday, while we were lagging behind,
my royal friend entered yonder hermitage after a deer; and there, as ill-luck
would have it, caught sight of a beautiful girl, called [S']akoontalá, the
hermit's daughter. From that moment, not another thought about returning
to the city! and all last night not a wink of sleep did he get for thinking of
the damsel. What is to be done? At any rate I will be on the watch for him
as soon as he has finished his toilet.
[Walking and looking about.]
Oh! here he comes, attended by the Yavana women, with bows in their
hands, wearing garlands of wild flowers. What shall I do? I have it. I will
pretend to stand in the easiest attitude for resting my bruised and crippled
limbs.
[Stands leaning on a staff.
Enter King DUSHYANTA, _followed by a retinue, in the manner
described_.
KING.
True, by no easy conquest may I win her, Yet are my hopes encouraged by
her mien, Love is not yet triumphant; but, methinks, The hearts of both are
ripe for his delights.
[Smiling.
Ah! thus does the lover delude himself; judging of the state of his loved
one's feelings by his own desires. But yet,
The stolen glance with half-averted eye, The hesitating gait, the quick
rebuke Addressed to her companion, who would fain Have stayed her
counterfeit departure; these Are signs not unpropitious to my suit. So
eagerly the lover feeds his hopes, Claiming each trivial gesture for his own.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
[Still in the same attitude.
Ah, friends, my hands cannot move to greet you with the usual salutation. I
can only just command my lips to wish your Majesty victory.
KING.
Why, what has paralysed your limbs?
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
You might as well ask me how my eye comes to water after you have
poked your finger into it.
KING.
I don't understand you; speak more intelligibly.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
Ah, my dear friend, is yonder upright reed transformed into a crooked plant
by its own act, or by the force of the current?
KING.
The current of the river causes it, I suppose.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
Ay; just as you are the cause of my crippled limbs.
KING.
How so?
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
Here are you living the life of a wild man of the woods in a savage
unfrequented region, while your State-affairs are left to shift for
themselves; and as for poor me, I am no longer master of my own limbs,
but have to follow you about day after day in your chases after wild
animals, till my bones are all crippled and out of joint. Do, my dear friend,
let me have one day's rest.
KING. [Aside.
This fellow little knows, while he talks in this manner, that my mind is
wholly engrossed by recollections of the hermit's daughter, and quite as
disinclined to the chase as his own.
No longer can I bend my well-braced bow Against the timid deer; nor e'er
again With well-aimed arrows can I think to harm These her beloved
associates, who enjoy The privilege of her companionship; Teaching her
tender glances in return.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA. [_Looking in the King's face_.
I may as well speak to the winds, for any attention you pay to my requests.
I suppose you have something on your mind, and are talking it over to
yourself.
KING. [Smiling.
I was only thinking that I ought not to disregard a friend's request.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
Then may the King live for ever!
[Moves off.
KING.
Stay a moment, my dear friend. I have something else to say to you.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
Say on, then.
KING.
When you have rested, you must assist me in another business which will
give you no fatigue.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
In eating something nice, I hope.
KING.
You shall know at some future time.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
No time better than the present.
KING.
What ho, there!
WARDER. [Entering.
What are your Majesty's commands?
KING.
O Raivatika, bid the General of the forces attend.
WARDER.
I will, Sire.
[_Exit and re-enters with the_ GENERAL.]
Come forward, General; his Majesty is looking towards you, and has some
order to give you.
GENERAL. [Looking at the KING.
Though hunting is known to produce ill effects, my royal master has
derived only benefit from it. For
Like the majestic elephant that roams O'er mountain wilds, so does the
King display A stalwart frame, instinct with vigorous life. His brawny arms
and manly chest are scored By frequent passage of the sounding string;
Unharmed he bears the midday sun; no toil His mighty spirit daunts; his
sturdy limbs, Stripped of redundant flesh, relinquish nought Of their robust
proportions, but appear In muscle, nerve, and sinewy fibre cased.
[Approaching the KING.
Victory to the King! We have tracked the wild beasts to their lairs in the
forest. Why delay, when everything is ready?
KING.
My friend Má[T.]Havya here has been disparaging the chase, till he has
taken away all my relish for it.
GENERAL. [Aside to MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
Persevere in your opposition, my good fellow; I will sound the King's real
feelings, and humour him accordingly.
[Aloud.
The blockhead talks nonsense, and your Majesty in your own person
furnishes the best proof of it. Observe, Sire, the advantage and pleasure the
hunter derives from the chase.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA. [Angrily.
Away! tempter, away! The King has recovered his senses, and is himself
again. As for you, you may, if you choose, wander about from forest to
forest, till some old bear seizes you by the nose, and makes a mouthful of
you.
KING.
My good General, as we are just now in the neighbourhood of a
consecrated grove, your panegyric upon hunting is somewhat ill-timed, and
I cannot assent to all you have said. For the present,
All undisturbed the buffaloes shall sport In yonder pool, and with their
ponderous horns Scatter its tranquil waters, while the deer, Couched here
and there in groups beneath the shade Of spreading branches, ruminate in
peace. And all securely shall the herd of boars Feed on the marshy sedge;
and thou, my bow, With slackened string, enjoy a long repose.
GENERAL.
So please your Majesty, it shall be as you desire.
KING.
Recall, then, the beaters who were sent in advance to surround the forest.
My troops must not be allowed to disturb this sacred retreat, and irritate its
pious inhabitants.
Know that within the calm and cold recluse Lurks unperceived a germ of
smothered flame, All-potent to destroy; a latent fire That rashly kindled
bursts with fury forth; As in the disc of crystal that remains Cool to the
touch, until the solar ray Falls on its polished surface, and excites The
burning heat that lies within concealed.
GENERAL.
Your Majesty's commands shall be obeyed.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
Off with you, you son of a slave! Your nonsense won't go down here, my
fine fellow.
[Exit GENERAL.
KING. [Looking at his attendants.
Here, women, take my hunting-dress; and you, Raivatika, keep guard
carefully outside.
ATTENDANTS.
We will, Sire.
[Exeunt.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
Now that you have got rid of these plagues, who have been buzzing about
us like so many flies, sit down, do, on that stone slab, with the shade of the
tree as your canopy, and I will seat myself by you quite comfortably.
KING.
Go you, and sit down first.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
Come along, then.
[_Both walk on a little way, and seat themselves_.
KING.
Má[T.]Havya, it may be said of you that you have never beheld anything
worth seeing; for your eyes have not yet looked upon the loveliest object in
creation.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
How can you say so, when I see your Majesty before me at this moment?
KING.
It is very natural that every one should consider his own friend perfect; but
I was alluding to [S']akoontalá, the brightest ornament of these hallowed
groves.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA. [Aside.
I understand well enough, but I am not going to humour him.
[Aloud.
If, as you intimate, she is a hermit's daughter, you cannot lawfully ask her
in marriage. You may as well then dismiss her from your mind, for any
good the mere sight of her can do.
KING.
Think you that a descendant of the mighty Puru could fix his affections on
an unlawful object?
Though, as men say, the offspring of the sage, The maiden to a nymph
celestial owes Her being, and by her mother left on earth, Was found and
nurtured by the holy man As his own daughter, in this hermitage. So, when
dissevered from its parent stalk, Some falling blossom of the jasmine,
wafted Upon the sturdy sun-flower, is preserved By its support from
premature decay.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA. [Smiling.
This passion of yours for a rustic maiden, when you have so many gems of
women at home in your palace, seems to me very like the fancy of a man
who is tired of sweet dates, and longs for sour tamarinds as a variety.
KING.
You have not seen her, or you would not talk in this fashion.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
I can quite understand it must require something surpassingly attractive to
excite the admiration of such a great man as you.
KING.
I will describe her, my dear friend, in a few words,
Man's all-wise Maker, wishing to create A faultless form, whose matchless
symmetry Should far transcend Creation's choicest works, Did call together
by his mighty will, And garner up in his eternal mind, A bright assemblage
of all lovely things; And then, as in a picture, fashion them Into one perfect
and ideal form-- Such the divine, the wondrous prototype, Whence her fair
shape was moulded into being.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
If that's the case, she must indeed throw all other beauties into the shade.
KING.
To my mind she really does.
This peerless maid is like a fragrant flower, Whose perfumed breath has
never been diffused; A tender bud, that no profaning hand Has dared to
sever from its parent stalk; A gem of priceless water, just released Pure and
unblemished from its glittering bed. Or may the maiden haply be compared
To sweetest honey, that no mortal lip Has sipped; or, rather, to the
mellowed fruit Of virtuous actions in some former birth, Now brought
to full perfection? Lives the man Whom bounteous heaven has destined to
espouse her?
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
Make haste, then, to her aid; you have no time to lose, if you don't wish
this fruit of all the virtues to drop into the mouth of some greasy-headed
rustic of devout habits.
KING.
The lady is not her own mistress, and her foster-father is not at home.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
Well, but tell me, did she look at all kindly upon you?
KING.
Maidens brought up in a hermitage are naturally shy and reserved; but for
all that She did look towards me, though she quick withdrew Her stealthy
glances when she met my gaze; She smiled upon me sweetly, but disguised
With maiden grace the secret of her smiles. Coy love was half unveiled;
then, sudden checked By modesty, left half to be divined.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
Why, of course, my dear friend, you never could seriously expect that at
the very first sight she would fall over head ears in love with you, and
without more ado come and sit in your lap.
KING.
When we parted from each other, she betrayed her liking for me by clearer
indications, but still with the utmost modesty. Scarce had the fair one from
my presence passed, When, suddenly, without apparent cause, She
stopped; and, counterfeiting pain, exclaimed, 'My foot is wounded by this
prickly grass,' Then, glancing at me tenderly, she feigned Another
charming pretext for delay, Pretending that a bush had caught her robe And
turned as if to disentangle it.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA
I trust you have laid in a good stock of provisions, for I see you intend
making this consecrated grove your game-preserve, and will be roaming
here in quest of sport for some time to come.
KING.
You must know, my good fellow, that I have been recognised by some of
the inmates of the hermitage. Now I want the assistance of your fertile
invention, in devising some excuse for going there again.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
There is but one expedient that I can suggest. You are the King, are you
not?
KING.
What then?
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
Say you have come for the sixth part of their grain , which they owe
you for tribute.
KING.
No, no, foolish man; those hermits pay me a very different kind of tribute,
which I value more than heaps of gold or jewels; observe,
The tribute which my other subjects bring Must moulder into dust, but holy
men Present me with a portion of the fruits Of penitential services and
prayers-- A precious and imperishable gift.
A VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.
We are fortunate; here is the object of our search.
KING. [Listening.
Surely those must be the voices of hermits, to judge by their deep tones.
WARDER. [Entering.
Victory to the King! two young hermits are in waiting outside, and solicit
an audience of your Majesty.
KING.
Introduce them Immediately.
WARDER.
I will, my liege.
[_Goes out, and re-enters with_ TWO YOUNG HERMITS.]
This way, Sirs, this way.
[Both the HERMITS _look at the KING.
FIRST HERMIT.
How majestic is his mien, and yet what confidence it inspires! But this
might be expected in a king, whose character and habits have earned for
him a title only one degree removed from that of a Sage .
In this secluded grove, whose sacred joys All may participate, he deigns to
dwell Like one of us; and daily treasures up A store of purest merit for
himself, By the protection of our holy rites. In his own person wondrously
are joined Both majesty and saintlike holiness; And often chanted by
inspired bards , His hallowed title of 'Imperial Sage' Ascends in joyous
accents to the skies.
SECOND HERMIT.
Bear in mind, Gautama, that this is the great Dushyanta, the friend of Indra.
FIRST HERMIT.
What of that?
SECOND HERMIT.
Where is the wonder if his nervous arm, Puissant and massive as the iron
bar That binds a castle-gateway, singly sways The sceptre of the universal
earth, E'en to its dark-green boundary of waters? Or if the gods, beholden
to his aid In their fierce warfare with the powers of hell , Should blend
his name with Indra's in their songs Of victory, and gratefully accord No
lower meed of praise to his braced bow, Than to the thunders of the god of
heaven?
BOTH THE HERMITS. [Approaching.
Victory to the King!
KING. [Rising from his seat.
Hail to you both!
BOTH THE HERMITS.
Heaven bless your Majesty!
[They offer fruits.
KING. [Respectfully receiving the offering.
Tell me, I pray you, the object of your visit.
BOTH THE HERMITS.
The inhabitants of the hermitage, having heard of your Majesty's sojourn in
our neighbourhood, make this humble petition:--
KING.
What are their commands?
BOTH THE HERMITS.
In the absence of our Superior, the great sage Kanwa, evil demons are
disturbing our sacrificial rites . Deign, therefore, accompanied by your
charioteer, to take up your abode in our hermitage for a few days.
KING.
I am honoured by your invitation.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA. [Aside.
Most opportune and convenient, certainly!
KING. [Smiling.
Ho, there, Raivatika! Tell the charioteer from me to bring round the chariot
with my bow.
WARDER.
I will, Sire.
[Exit.
BOTH THE HERMITS. [Joyfully.
Well it becomes the King by acts of grace To emulate the virtues of his
race. Such acts thy lofty destiny attest; Thy mission is to succour the
distressed.
KING. [Bowing to the HERMITS.
Go first, reverend Sirs, I will follow you immediately.
BOTH THE HERMITS.
May victory attend you!
[Exeunt.
KING.
My dear Má[T.]Havya, are not you full of longing to see [S']akoontalá?
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
To tell you the truth, though I was just now brimful of desire to see her, I
have not a drop left since this piece of news about the demons.
KING.
Never fear; you shall keep close to me for protection.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
Well, you must be my guardian-angel, and act the part of a very Vishnu
 to me.
WARDER. [Entering.
Sire, the chariot is ready, and only waits to conduct you to victory. But
here is a messenger named Karabhaka, just arrived from your capital, with
a message from the Queen, your mother.
KING. [Respectfully.
How say you? a messenger from the venerable Queen?
WARDER.
Even so.
KING.
Introduce him at once.
WARDER.
I will, Sire.
[_Goes out and re-enters with_ KARABHAKA.]
Behold the King. Approach.
KARABHAKA.
Victory to the King! The Queen-mother bids me say that in four days from
the present time she intends celebrating a solemn ceremony for the
advancement and preservation of her son. She expects that your Majesty
will honour her with your presence on that occasion.
KING.
This places me in a dilemma. Here, on the one hand, is the commission of
these holy men to be executed; and, on the other, the command of my
revered parent to be obeyed. Both duties are too sacred to be neglected.
What is to be done?
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
You will have to take up an intermediate position between the two, like
King Tri[s']anku , who was suspended between heaven and earth,
because the sage Vi[s']wámitra commanded him to mount up to heaven,
and the gods ordered him down again.
KING.
I am certainly very much perplexed. For here,
Two different duties are required of me In widely distant places; how can I
In my own person satisfy them both? Thus is my mind distracted, and
impelled In opposite directions like a stream That, driven back by rocks,
still rushes on, Forming two currents in its eddying course.
[Reflecting.]
Friend Má[T.]Havya, as you were my playfellow in childhood, the Queen
has already received you like a second son; go you, then, back to her, and
tell her of my solemn engagement to assist these holy men. You can supply
my place in the ceremony, and act the part of a son to the Queen.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
With the greatest pleasure in the world; but don't suppose that I am really
coward enough to have the slightest fear of those trumpery demons.
KING.
Oh! of course not; a great Bráhman like you could not possibly give way to
such weakness.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
You must let me travel in a manner suitable to the King's younger brother.
KING.
Yes, I shall send my retinue with you, that there may be no farther
disturbance in this sacred forest.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA, [With a strut.
Already I feel quite like a young prince.
KING. [Aside.
This is a giddy fellow, and in all probability he will let out the truth about
my present pursuit to the women of the palace. What is to be done? I must
say something to deceive him.
[Aloud to MÁ[T.]HAVYA, taking him by the hand.]
Dear friend, I am going to the hermitage wholly and solely out of respect
for its pious inhabitants, and not because I have really any liking for
[S']akoontalá, the hermit's daughter. Observe:--
What suitable communion could there be Between a monarch and a rustic
girl? I did but feign an idle passion, friend, Take not in earnest what was
said in jest.
MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
Don't distress yourself; I quite understand.
[Exeunt.
* * * * *
PRELUDE TO ACT III.
SCENE.--The Hermitage.
Enter a YOUNG BRÁHMAN _carrying bundles of ku[S']a-grass for the
use of the sacrificing priest_.
YOUNG BRÁHMAN.
How wonderful is the power of King Dushyanta! No sooner did he enter
our hermitage, than we were able to proceed with our sacrificial rites,
unmolested by the evil demons.
No need to fix the arrow to the bow; The mighty monarch sounds the
quivering string, And, by the thunder of his arms dismayed, Our demon
foes are scattered to the wind.
I must now, therefore, make haste and deliver to the sacrificing priests
these bundles of Ku[s']a-grass, to be strewn round the altar.
[_Walking and looking about; then addressing some one off the stage_.]
Why, Priyamvadá, for whose use are you carrying that ointment of
Usíra-root and those lotus-leaves with fibres attached to them?
[Listening for her answer.]
What Say you?--that [S']akoontalá is suffering from fever produced by
exposure to the sun, and that this ointment is to cool her burning frame?
Nurse her with care, then, Priyamvadá, for she is cherished by our reverend
Superior as the very breath of his nostrils. I, for my part, will contrive
that soothing waters, hallowed in the sacrifice, he administered to her by
the hands of Gautamí.
[Exit.
ACT III.
SCENE.--The Sacred Grove.
Enter KING DUSHYANTA, with the air of one in love.
KING. [Sighing thoughtfully.
The holy sage possesses magic power In virtue of his penance; she, his
ward, Under the shadow of his tutelage, Rests in security, I know it well;
Yet sooner shall the rushing cataract In foaming eddies re-ascend the steep,
Than my fond heart turn back from its pursuit.
God of love! God of the flowery shafts ! we lovers are cruelly deceived
by thee, and by the Moon, however deserving of confidence you may both
appear.
For not to us do these thine arrows seem Pointed with tender flowerets; not
to us Doth the pale Moon irradiate the earth With beams of silver fraught
with cooling dews; But on our fevered frames the moon-beams fall Like
darts of fire, and every flower-tipt shaft Of Káma, as it probes our
throbbing hearts, Seems to be barbed with hardest adamant.
Adorable god of love! hast thou no pity for me?
[In a tone of anguish.]
How can thy arrows be so sharp when they are pointed with flowers? Ah! I
know the reason:
E'en now in thine unbodied essence lurks The fire of [S']iva's anger,
like the flame That ever hidden in the secret depths Of ocean, smoulders
there unseen. How else Could'st thou, all immaterial as thou art,
Inflame our hearts thus fiercely?--thou, whose form Was scorched to ashes
by a sudden flash From the offended god's terrific eye.
Yet, methinks,
Welcome this anguish, welcome to my heart These rankling wounds
inflicted by the god, Who on his scutcheon bears the monster-fish
Slain by his prowess; welcome death itself, So that, commissioned by the
lord of love, This fair one be my executioner. Adorable divinity! Can I by
no reproaches excite your commiseration? Have I not daily offered at thy
shrine Innumerable vows, the only food Of thine ethereal essence? Are my
prayers Thus to be slighted? Is it meet that thou Should'st aim thy shafts at
thy true votary's heart, Drawing thy bow-string even to thy ear?
[Pacing up and down in a melancholy manner.]
Now that the holy men have completed their rites, and have no more need
of my services, how shall I dispel my melancholy?
[Sighing.]
I have but one resource. Oh for another sight of the Idol of my soul! I will
seek her.
[Glancing at the sun.]
In all probability, as the sun's heat is now at its height, [S']akoontalá is
passing her time under the shade of the bowers on the banks of the Máliní,
attended by her maidens. I will go and look for her there.
[Walking and looking about.]
I suspect the fair one has but just passed by this avenue of young trees.
Here, as she tripped along, her fingers plucked The opening buds; these
lacerated plants, Shorn of their fairest blossoms by her hand, Seem like
dismembered trunks, whose recent wounds Are still unclosed; while from
the bleeding socket Of many a severed stalk, the milky juice Still slowly
trickles, and betrays her path.
[Feeling a breeze.]
What a delicious breeze meets me in this spot!
Here may the zephyr, fragrant with the scent Of lotuses, and laden with the
spray Caught from the waters of the rippling stream, Fold in its close
embrace my fevered limbs.
[Walking and looking about.]
She must be somewhere in the neighbourhood of this arbour of
overhanging creepers enclosed by plantations of cane;
[Looking down.]
For at the entrance here I plainly see A line of footsteps printed in the sand.
Here are the fresh impressions of her feet; Their well-known outline faintly
marked in front, More deeply towards the heel; betokening The graceful
undulation of her gait.
I will peep through those branches.
[_Walking and looking. With transport_.]
Ah! now my eyes are gratified by an entrancing sight. Yonder is the
beloved of my heart reclining on a rock strewn with flowers, and attended
by her two friends. How fortunate! Concealed behind the leaves, I will
listen to their conversation, without raising their suspicions.
[_Stands concealed, and gazes at them_.
[S']AKOONTALÁ _and her two attendants, holding fans in their hands,
are discovered as described_.
PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.
[_Fanning her. In a tone of affection_.
Dearest [S']akoontalá, is the breeze raised by these broad lotus-leaves
refreshing to you?
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Dear friends, why should you trouble yourselves to fan me?
[PRIYAMVADÁ and ANASÚYÁ look sorrowfully at one another.
KING.
[S']akoontalá seems indeed to be seriously ill.
[Thoughtfully.]
Can it be the intensity of the heat that has affected her? or does my heart
suggest the true cause of her malady?
[Gazing at her passionately.]
Why should I doubt it?
The maiden's spotless bosom is o'erspread With cooling balsam; on her
slender arm Her only bracelet, twined with lotus-stalks, Hangs loose and
withered; her recumbent form Betokens languor. Ne'er could noon-day sun
Inflict such fair disorder on a maid-- No, love, and love alone, is here to
blame.
PRIYAMVADÁ. [Aside to ANASÚYÁ.
I have observed, Anasúyá, that [S']akoontalá has been indisposed ever
since her first interview with King Dushyanta. Depend upon it, her ailment
is to be traced to that source.
ANASÚYÁ.
The same suspicion, dear, has crossed my mind. But I will at once ask her
and ascertain the truth.
[Aloud.]
Dear [S']akoontalá, I am about to put a question to you. Your indisposition
is really very serious.
[S']AKOONTALÁ. [Half rising from her couch.
What were you going to ask?
ANASÚYÁ.
We know very little about love-matters, dear [S']akoontalá; but for all that,
I cannot help suspecting your present state to be something similar to that
of the lovers we have heard about in romances. Tell us frankly what is the
cause of your disorder. It is useless to apply a remedy, until the disease be
understood.
KING.
Anasúyá bears me out in my suspicion.
[S']AKOONTALÁ. [Aside.
I am, indeed, deeply in love; but cannot rashly disclose my passion to these
young girls.
PRIYAMVADÁ.
What Anasúyá says, dear [S']akoontalá, is very just. Why give so little
heed to your ailment? Every day you are becoming thinner; though I must
confess your complexion is still as beautiful as ever.
KING.
Priyamvadá speaks most truly.
Sunk is her velvet cheek; her wasted bosom Loses its fulness; e'en her
slender waist Grows more attenuate; her face is wan, Her shoulders
droop;--as when the vernal blasts Sear the young blossoms of the
Mádhaví, Blighting their bloom; so mournful is the change. Yet in its
sadness, fascinating still, Inflicted by the mighty lord of love On the fair
figure of the hermit's daughter.
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Dear friends, to no one would I rather reveal the nature of my malady than
to you; but I should only be troubling you.
PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.
Nay, this is the very point about which we are so solicitous. Sorrow shared
with affectionate friends is relieved of half its poignancy.
KING.
Pressed by the partners of her joys and griefs, Her much beloved
companions, to reveal The cherished secret locked within her breast, She
needs must utter it; although her looks Encourage me to hope, my bosom
throbs As anxiously I listen for her answer.
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Know then, dear friends, that from the first moment the illustrious Prince
who is the guardian of our sacred grove presented himself to my sight--
[_Stops short, and appears confused_.
PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.
Say on, dear [S']akoontalá, say on.
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Ever since that happy moment, my heart's affections have been fixed upon
him, and my energies of mind and body have all deserted me, as you see.
KING. [With rapture.
Her own lips have uttered the words I most longed to hear.
Love lit the flame, and Love himself allays My burning fever, as when
gathering clouds Rise o'er the earth in summer's dazzling noon, And
grateful showers dispel the morning heat.
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
You must consent, then, dear friends, to contrive some means by which I
may find favour with the King, or you will have ere long to assist at my
funeral.
KING.
Enough! These words remove all my doubts.
PRIYAMVADÁ. [Aside to ANASÚYÁ.
She is far gone in love, dear Anasúyá, and no time ought to be lost. Since
she has fixed her affections on a monarch who is the ornament of Puru's
line, we need not hesitate for a moment to express our approval.
ANASÚYÁ.
I quite agree with you.
PRIYAMVADÁ. [Aloud.
We wish you joy, dear [S']akoontalá. Your affections are fixed on an object
in every respect worthy of you,. The noblest river will unite itself to the
ocean, and the lovely Mádhaví-creeper clings naturally to the Mango, the
only tree capable of supporting it.
KING.
Why need we wonder if the beautiful constellation Vi[s']ákhá pines to be
united with the Moon?
ANASÚYÁ.
By what stratagem can we best secure to our friend the accomplishment of
her heart's desire both speedily and secretly?
PRIYAMVADÁ.
The latter point is all we have to think about. As to 'speedily,' I look upon
the whole affair as already settled.
ANASÚYÁ.
How so?
PRIYAMVADÁ.
Did you not observe how the King betrayed his liking by the tender manner
in which he gazed upon her, and how thin he has become the last few days,
as if he had been lying awake thinking of her?
KING. [Looking at himself.
Quite true! I certainly am becoming thin from want of sleep:
As night by night in anxious thought I raise This wasted arm to rest my
sleepless head, My jewelled bracelet, sullied by the tears That trickle from
my eyes in scalding streams, Slips towards my elbow from my shrivelled
wrist. Oft I replace the bauble, but in vain; So easily it spans the fleshless
limb That e'en the rough and corrugated skin, Scarred by the bow-string,
will not check its fall.
PRIYAMVADÁ.
An idea strikes me, Anasúyá. Let [S']akoontalá write a love-letter; I will
conceal it in a flower, and contrive to drop it in the King's path. He will
surely mistake it for the remains of some sacred offering, and will, in all
probability, pick it up.
ANASÚYÁ.
A very ingenious device! It my entire approval; but what says
[S']akoontalá?
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
I must consider before I can consent to it.
PRIYAMVADÁ.
Could, you not, dear [S']akoontalá, think of some pretty composition in
verse, containing a delicate declaration of your love?
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Well, I will do my best; but my heart trembles when I think of the chances
of a refusal.
KING. [With rapture.
Too timid maid, here stands the man from whom Thou fearest a repulse;
supremely blessed To call thee all his own. Well might he doubt His title to
thy love; but how could'st thou Believe thy beauty powerless to subdue
him?
PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.
You undervalue your own merits, dear [S']akoontalá. What man in his
senses would intercept with the skirt of his robe the bright rays of the
autumnal moon, which alone can allay the fever of his body?
[S']AKOONTALÁ. [Smiling.
Then it seems I must do as I am bid.
[Sits down and appears to be thinking.
KING.
How charming she looks! My very eyes forget to wink, jealous of losing
even for an instant a sight so enchanting.
How beautiful the movement of her brow, As through her mind love's
tender fancies flow! And, as she weighs her thoughts, how sweet to trace
The ardent passion mantling in her face!
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Dear girls, I have thought of a verse, but I have no writing-materials at
hand.
PRIYAMVADÁ.
Write the letters with your nail on this lotus-leaf, which is smooth as a
parrot's breast.
[S']AKOONTALÁ. [After writing the verse.
Listen, dear friends, and tell me whether the ideas are appropriately
expressed.
PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.
We are all attention.
[S']AKOONTALÁ. [Reads.
I know not the secret thy bosom conceals, Thy form is not near me to
gladden my sight; But sad is the tale that my fever reveals, Of the love that
consumes me by day and by night.
KING. [Advancing hastily towards her.
Nay, Love does but warm thee, fair maiden,--thy frame Only droops like
the bud in the glare of the noon; But me he consumes with a pitiless flame,
As the beams of the day-star destroy the pale moon.
PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.
[Looking at him joyfully and rising to salute him.
Welcome, the desire of our hearts, that so speedily presents itself!
[[S']AKOONTALÁ makes an effort to rise.
KING.
Nay, trouble not thyself, dear maiden.
Move not to do me homage; let thy limbs Still softly rest upon their
flowery couch; And gather fragrance from the lotus-stalks, Bruised by the
fevered contact of thy frame.
ANASÚYÁ.
Deign, gentle Sir, to seat yourself on the rock on which our friend is
reposing.
[The KING sits down. [S']AKOONTALÁ is confused.
PRIYAMVADÁ.
Any one may see at a glance that you are deeply attached to each other.
But the affection I have for my friend prompts me to say something of
which you hardly require to be informed.
KING.
Do not hesitate to speak out, my good girl. If you omit to say what is in
your mind, you may be sorry for it afterwards.
PRIYAMVADÁ.
Is it not your special office as a King to remove the suffering of your
subjects who are in trouble?
KING.
Such is my duty, most assuredly.
PRIYAMVADÁ.
Know, then, that our dear friend has been brought to her present state of
suffering entirely through love for you. Her life is in your hands; take pity
on her and restore her to health.
KING.
Excellent maiden, our attachment is mutual. It is I who am the most
honoured by it.
[S']AKOONTALÁ. [_Looking at PRIYAMVADÁ_.
What do you mean by detaining the King, who must be anxious to return to
his royal consorts after so long a separation?
KING.
Sweet maiden, banish from thy mind the thought That I could love another.
Thou dost reign Supreme, without a rival, in my heart, And I am thine
alone; disown me not, Else must I die a second deadlier death, Killed by
thy words, as erst by Káma's shafts.
ANASÚYÁ.
Kind Sir, we have heard it said that kings have many favourite consorts.
You must not, then, by your behaviour towards our dear friend, give her
relations cause to sorrow for her.
KING.
Listen, gentle maiden, while in a few words I quiet your anxiety.
Though many beauteous forms my palace grace, Henceforth two things
alone will I esteem The glory of my royal dynasty-- My sea-girt realm, and
this most lovely maid.
PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.
We are satisfied by your assurances.
PRIYAMVADÁ. [Glancing on one side.
See, Anasúyá, there is our favourite little fawn running about in great
distress, and turning its eyes in every direction as if looking for its mother;
come, let us help the little thing to find her. [Both move away.
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Dear friends, dear friends, leave me not alone and unprotected. Why need
you both go?
PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.
Unprotected! when the Protector of the world is at your side.
[Exeunt.
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
What! have they both really left me?
KING.
Distress not thyself, sweet maiden. Thy adorer is at hand to wait upon thee.
Oh let me tend thee, fair one, in the place Of thy dear friends; and with
broad lotus fans Raise cooling breezes to refresh thy frame; Or shall I
rather, with caressing touch, Allay the fever of thy limbs, and soothe Thy
aching feet, beauteous as blushing lilies?
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Nay, touch me not. I will not incur the censure of those whom I am bound
to respect.
[Rises and attempts to go.
KING.
Fair one, the heat of noon has not yet subsided, and thy body is still feeble.
How canst thou quit thy fragrant couch of flowers, And from thy throbbing
bosom cast aside Its covering of lotus-leaves, to brave With weak and
fainting limbs the noon-day heat?
[Forces her to turn back.
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Infringe not the rules of decorum, mighty descendant of Puru. Remember,
though I love you, I have no power to dispose of myself.
KING.
Why this fear of offending your relations, timid maid? When your
venerable foster-father hears of it, he will not find fault with you. He
knows that the law permits us to be united without consulting him.
In Indra's heaven, so at least 'tis said, No nuptial rites prevail, nor is the
bride Led to the altar by her future lord; But all in secret does the
bridegroom plight His troth, and each unto the other vow Mutual
allegiance. Such espousals, too, Are authorised on earth, and many
daughters Of royal saints thus wedded to their lords Have still received
their father's benison.
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Leave me, leave me; I must take counsel with my female friends.
KING.
I will leave thee when--
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
When?
KING.
When I have gently stolen from thy lips Their yet untasted nectar, to allay
The raging of my thirst, e'en as the bee Sips the fresh honey from the
opening bud.
[Attempts to raise her face. [S']AKOONTALÁ tries to prevent him_.
A VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.
The loving birds, doomed by fate to nightly separation, must bid
farewell to each other, for evening is at hand.
[S']AKOONTALÁ. [In confusion.
Great Prince, I hear the voice of the matron Gautamí. She is coming this
way to inquire after my health. Hasten and conceal yourself behind the
branches.
KING.
I will. [Conceals himself.
Enter GAUTAMÍ _with a vase in her hand, preceded by two attendants_.
ATTENDANTS.
This way, most venerable Gautamí.
GAUTAMÍ. [Approaching [S']AKOONTALÁ.
My child, is the fever of thy limbs allayed?
[S']AKOONTALÁ.
Venerable mother, there is certainly a change for the better.
GAUTAMÍ.
Let me sprinkle you with this holy water, and all your ailments will depart.
[Sprinkling [S']AKOONTALÁ on the head_.]
The day is closing, my child; come, let us go to the cottage.
[They all move away.
[S']AKOONTALÁ. [Aside.
Oh my heart! thou didst fear to taste of happiness when it was within thy
reach. Now that the object of thy desires is torn from thee, how bitter will
be thy remorse, how distracting thine anguish!
[_Moving on a few steps and stopping. Aloud_.]
Farewell! bower of creepers, sweet soother of my sufferings, farewell! may
I soon again be happy under thy shade.
[Exit reluctantly with the others.
KING.
[_Returning to his former seat in the arbour. Sighing_.
Alas! how many are the obstacles to the accomplishment of our wishes!
Albeit she did coyly turn away Her glowing cheek, and with her fingers
guard Her pouting lips, that murmured a denial In faltering accents, she did
yield herself A sweet reluctant captive to my will. As eagerly I raised her
lovely face; But ere with gentle force I stole the kiss, Too envious Fate did
mar my daring purpose.
Whither now shall I betake myself? I will tarry for a brief space in this
bower of creepers, so endeared to me by the presence of my beloved
[S']akoontalá.
[Looking round.
Here printed on the flowery couch I see The fair impression of her slender
limbs; Here is the sweet confession of her love, Traced with her nail upon
the lotus-leaf; And yonder are the withered lily-stalks That graced her
wrist. While all around I view Things that recall her image, can I quit This
bower, e'en though its living be fled?
A VOICE IN THE AIR.
Great King,
Scarce is our evening sacrifice begun, When evil demons, lurid as the
clouds That gather round the dying orb of day, Cluster in hideous troops,
obscene and dread, About our altars, casting far and near Terrific shadows,
while the sacred fire Sheds a pale lustre o'er their ghostly shapes.
KING.
I come to the rescue, I come.
[Exit.
* * * * *
[Exeunt omnes.
